
<h1 style="color: CornflowerBlue;">Professional Self-Assessment</h1>

<h1 style="color: CornflowerBlue;">Code Review</h1>

<p style="font-size: 20px;">In my code review video, I analyzed and described the code in two files: "SlideShow.java" and "AnimalShelter.py". I also described the initial enhancements I planned for the projects.</p>
<code style="font-size: 18px;">You can watch the code review <a href="https://vimeo.com/1053905065/de2fd18e85?share=copy">here</a>.</code> 

<h1 style="color: CornflowerBlue;">Software Design and Engineering</h1>

<p style="font-size: 20px;">One of the projects we worked on in CS-250 Software Development Lifecycle was a program for a slideshow. The program featured 5 wellness retreat travel destinations that the user could scroll through using next and previous buttons. It was built using Java Swing, which is a GUI toolkit, in the Fall of 2023. While the program is simple, I was quite proud of building it at the time because I was still new to Java and had never used Swing before. I selected the artifact because I thought it had potential to be built upon to make it more dynamic, interactive, and complex. Initially I was going to keep with the wellness destination theme and build upon it with more slides and a more interactive interface. When I started working on the enhanced project, I quickly decided that it was dull and I could enhance it more by taking the base code and turning the slideshow into an interactive spelling game.</p> 
<p style="font-size: 20px;">Utilizing my Java programing skills, I repurposed and expanded some of the original code and wrote a lot of new code into the program. While the enhanced artifact scarcely resembles the original slideshow, I did use much of the base code as my starting point in building the application. This showcased my ability to not only build upon existing code, but enhance a program with new code as well. For instance, there was no user input in the original program. I created loops with user input so the user could type in the word they are learning, in this case animal names, and get a message saying whether they spelled it correctly or not. Additionally, I created all of the slides using PowerPoint and Apple’s new AI art app called Playground to draw the animal characters.</p>
<p style="font-size: 20px;">Once I had a clear idea of what I wanted my educational spelling application to do, I knew I could achieve the desired outcome with the Java programing skills that I have. I focused on one area at a time, such as creating new buttons or a loop to respond to user input, so I could be sure a task was complete before moving on. Most of the problems I ran into were small programming mistakes such as a missing semi-colon or failure to close braces or parenthesis. Eclipse IDE, which I used to build the program, is very helpful in finding these mistakes. Ultimately the original slideshow application was greatly improved upon and evolved into a dynamic and useful program that I am proud of.</p>
<p style="font-size: 20px;">By utilizing clear in-line comments I built a collaborative environment that people with varying Java skill levels could understand. This may help people to learn Java by studying the code and understanding what each code block does. I demonstrated my ability to use sound programming practices that adhere to industry standards and are also efficient and concise. Because the application is a visual communication tool, I took great care in making it visually appealing to the target audience, which is children. I also made sure the written aspect of the slides was done in a simple and coherent manner. By using an object-oriented language like Java, I build a secure program by utilization abstraction and encapsulation to protect blocks of code from misuse. By keeping some methods and functions private, I can ensure the program will run as intended by allowing users to interact with a limited amount of the code. 
</p>

<code style="font-size: 18px;">You can find Learn Animal Names <a href="https://github.com/charlielcharlie/charlielcharlie.github.io/tree/main/LearnAnimalNames">here</a>.</code> 

<h1 style="color: CornflowerBlue;">Algorithms and Data Structure</h1>

<p style="font-size: 20px;">For the Algorithms and Data Structures section of the capstone I further enhanced the Learn Animal Names program I created from the original slideshow application. In order to make the game more changeling for users after they’ve played it for some time, I incorporated a feature to randomize the slides. Because the slides start from easiest to hardest, the random feature may keep a user engaged with the program longer as their spelling abilities increase. A random algorithm utility is imported using Java but a mathematical function is needed to ensure the slides are called in a truly random fashion. By multiplying the random algorithm by two and then dividing that by the length of the image array, I was able to create an algorithmic function to achieve the desired effect. I further improved the original application by reorganizing the data structure that handles the images within the program. Originally the images were loaded using a clunky “if/else if” loop. I organized the images using an efficient image array that not only calls for less code, but could handle the 30 image files that are needed for the program. I also built an array to hold the correct spelling of the animal names. When the user inputs the animal’s name, the spelling is verified against this array.</p>
<p style="font-size: 20px;">Using in-line comments, I clearly describe the arrays and the random algorithm so that someone studying the code will understand what that code block is for. This will help contextualize the code for people of various Java programming abilities. The functions and arrays are technologically sound and appropriate for this program. They heightened the functionality of the program while also simplifying the code. I made good use of the various Java tools and utilities and used them in a creative fashion and the code is secure by using private and public functions in the appropriate places.</p>


<code style="font-size: 18px;">You can find Learn Animal Names <a href="https://github.com/charlielcharlie/charlielcharlie.github.io/tree/main/LearnAnimalNames">here</a>.</code> 

<h1 style="color: CornflowerBlue;">Databases</h1>

<p style="font-size: 20px;">The artifact called AnimalShelter.py was created for CS 340 Client/Server Development in the Spring of 2024. It is a Python file that enables CRUD operations against a database in MongoDB. CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update, and Delete and the database is collection of data on adoptable animals at the Austin Animal Center. I chose this artifact for enchantment because it is such a simple program that it provided a wide range of improvements that could be made to it. This gave me an opportunity to improve on the existing data storage format which relied on accessing the traditional MongoDB. Now, the data is stored in MongoDB Atlas which is a completely cloud based system. This enabled me to build a Python program to perform the CRUD operations directly in Python instead of having to use a Terminal.</p>
<p style="font-size: 20px;">The enhanced Python code features a menu that the user can select from to perform the desired operations which will then manipulate the data in Atlas. I also enhanced the program by creating three Python files instead of one; Main.py, Animal.py, and Database.py. This resulted in a more structured and cohesive code with the Animal and Database classes being imported into Main. Through these changes I improved the structure of the Python program and simplified access to the database by creating a cloud-based version of it. I had never used Atlas before so it took a lot of research to figure out how to set up the database and then access it in Python. It was a positive learning experience and now I am quite proficient in using Atlas. One enhancement I originally intended to make ultimately became unfeasible. I wanted the user to be able to create, update, and delete more than one file a time. This ended up not working within my menu structure and I had to leave this feature out. I was however able to let the user read more than one file at a time and I am happy with that compromise.</p>
<p style="font-size: 20px;">The Python code has in-line comments so a programmer will easily understand what the various code blocks do and what they are for. The code is also technologically sound and aligns with best practices. By breaking the code up into separate Python files and classes, I simplified the code and increased the security of the code. By not having the entire program in one file you can help mitigate problems and errors while also making them easier to find and fix. I believe with this enhancement I was able to demonstrate my Python programming skills in relation to databases and my understanding of a how a database interacts with a program created to manipulate it.</p>




<code style="font-size: 18px;">You can find AnimalShelter <a href="https://github.com/charlielcharlie/charlielcharlie.github.io/blob/main/AnimalShelterCapstone.zip">here</a>.</code> 




